# gene-mat-recipe
This is a recipe to make a gene matrix.

## Usage
1. Clone this repository using ```git clone https://github.com/mwjjeong/gene-mat-recipe.git```
2. Download necessary data by executing ```src/download.py```
3. Execute the cells in ```src/recipe.ipynb``` in a given order
4. You can change some settings by editing configuration files in ```conf/```. Here are details of the configuration files.
    - ```conf/filepaths.yaml``` lists paths of files used to make a gene matrix. It is not recommended to edit this configuration.
    - ```conf/fileurls.yaml``` lists URLs of files to download data used to make a gene matrix. Do not edit this file.
    - ```conf/gene_biotype.yaml``` lists gene biotypes with their parent categories defined in the GENCODE v33. Do not edit this file.
    - ```conf/gene_list_names``` lists column names of a gene matrix. You can edit the values if you want to change column names.
    - Note: Do not edit the keys of all the configuration files.
    
## Contents

#### Gene lists from the previous gene matrix (An et al., Science, 2018)

- **ASD associated genes (FDR≤0.1)**
- **ASD associated genes (FDR≤0.3)**
- **Midfetal co-expression genes**
- **Constrained genes (pLI ≥ 0.9)**
- **Postsynaptic density genes**
- **Developmental delay genes**
- **Brain expressed genes**
- **CHD8 targets**
- **FMRP targets**

#### GENCODE biotypes
- **Protein coding genes**
- **Long ncRNAs**
- **Small ncRNAs**
- **Pseudogenes**
- **IG/TR genes**

#### Updated gene lists

- **102 ASD genes (Satterstrom et al., Cell, 2020)**
- **299 DDD genes**
- **Haploinsufficient genes (gnomAD pLI ≥ 0.9)**
- **Haploinsufficient genes (gnomAD pLI ≥ 0.995)**
- **Genes in WGCNA modules associated with ASD (Parikshak et al., Nature, 2016)**
    - RNA-seq of 251 post-mortem samples of frontal and temporal cortex and cerebellum from 48 individuals with ASD and 49 control subjects
    - Identified 6 modules significantly associated with ASD of 24 modules from WGCNA
        - Upregulated: CTX.M9, CTX.M19, CTX.M20 
        - Downregulated: CTX.M4, CTX.M10, CTX.M16
- **Marker genes of cell clusters from scRNA-seq (Nowakowski et al., Science, 2017)**
    - scRNA-seq of samples from primary cortical and medial ganglionic eminence (MGE) in developing human telencephalon
    - 5.85 ~ 37 PCW
    - Unbiased clustering and found marker genes for each cluster
    - Transcriptionally distinct cell clusters corresponding to 11 broad categories: astrocytes, oligodendrocyte precursor cells, microglia, radial glia, intermediate progenitor cells, excitatory cortical neurons, ventral MGE progenitors, inhibitory cortical interneurons, choroid plexus cells, mural cells, and endothelial cells
- **Marker genes of cell clusters from scRNA-seq (Li et al., Science, 2018)**
    - scRNA-seq of 9 de-identified postmortem brains (Table S3)
    - 5 PCW ~ 20 PCW
    - Marker genes for each cell type of Pallium, CP, DFC, NCX regions in a human brain
- **Marker genes of cell clusters from snRNA-seq (Velmeshev et al., Science, 2019)**
    - snRNA-seq
    - 41 post-mortem tissue samples including prefrontal cortex (PFC) and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) from 16 controls and 15 ASD patients.
